=============================================
G10/R CHESS ROM Cartridge for the ZX Spectrum
Sinclair Research
=============================================

The chessboard with pieces laid out for the beginning of a game will automatically
appear. The program will ask you whether you want to play of set up the board
differently. Press P to play. You will then be asked what colour you would like to
play. Press W for white and B tor black. Finally the level of play is requested.
Press a number from 0 to 9. Usually it is sufficient to play at one of the lower
levels (0 to 3, say) for a rapid response to moves.

The positions of the pieces on the board are defined by using the modern algebraic
notation. The columns on the board are labelled A to H and the rows 1 to 8.

White Queen's rook is always the square A1 in the initial set-up. The rows and
columns on the board are labelled on the screen.

To enter your move, type the coordinates (column letter followed by row number) of
the square of the piece you want to move, followed by the coordinates of the
square to which you wish to move it. No delimiter between coordinates 'from' and
'to' is required - it will automatically be inserted. After you have typed in your
move, the appropriate piece will be moved, and the computer will consider and
apply its move.

All legal moves are allowed including castling and en passant. The program will not
allow invalid moves. Casting is achieved by entering the King's move. On entering
your move, if you make an error, you may always correct it by using the delete key
ether shifted or unshifted.

A number of commands may be applied at any stage. Typing the key R asks the
computer to recommend a move to you and it will do so at the game level of search
on which it is currently set. L allows you to change the level at which the
computer is playing. Z will copy the complete screen to an attached printer.
X exits from the game to start afresh or to set up the board.


Setting up the Board

You may set up the board to examine a problem as you wish. At the start of the
game, or after exiting, press S for set-up. The cursor keys 5, 6, 7 and 8 can be
used either shifted or unshifted to move a flashing cursor around the screen. The
command C clears the board of pieces completely. The delete key deletes the piece
at the current cursor position. The letters K, Q, R, B, N and P are used to place
the appropriate piece on the board. X exits from the set-up routine.


Joysticks

You may not use joysticks with this game.
