===========================================
Plus D Interface Manual for the ZX Spectrum
Miles Gordon Technology
===========================================


THE MGT PLUS D

The Disc and Printer Interface for the
ZX Spectrum 48K
ZX Spectrum +
ZX Spectrum 128K
ZX Spectrum +2
ZX Spectrum +2A/+3 via a fixer board (see end of this document)


from Miles Gordon Technology


USER MANUAL

© MGT 1987






NOTICE

This  manual, and the information contained herein, is copyright 
material and  may not  be reproduced,  transcribed, stored  in a 
retrieval system,  translated  into  any  language  or  computer 
language, or transmitted in  any  form  whatsoever  without  the 
prior written consent of Miles Gordon Technology.

The manual  is  intended  to  provide  the  user  with  detailed 
information   adequate  for   the  efficient   installation  and 
operation of  the  equipment  involved.   However,  while  every 
effort has been  taken  to  ensure  accuracy,  the  manufacturer 
assumes  no liability resulting from errors or omissions in this 
manual, or from the use of the information contained herein.

Miles  Gordon Technology reserves  the right both  to change the 
specifications of the PLUS D and to revise this publication from 
time to time  without obligation  to notify  any person  of such 
revision or changes.


Issue 2 June 1988




CONTENTS

SETTING UP ...........................................  3

CREATING YOUR SYSTEM DISC ............................  3

USING A DISC DRIVE ...................................  5
        Compatible Disc Drives                      (5)
        Loading the Disc Operating System           (5)
        The Catalogue                               (6)

PLUS D DISC DRIVE COMMANDS ...........................  8
             Saving a File and Verifying            (8)
             Loading a Program                      (9)
             Breaking into a Program                (9)
             Renaming a File                        (9)
             Copying a File                         (10)
             Erasing a File                         (10)
             Creating an Autoload File              (11)
             The Spectrum's Reset Button            (11)
             Snapshot Files                         (12)
             Abbreviated Syntax                     (13)
             Wild-Card Files                        (14)
             Formatting New Discs                   (14)

ERROR REPORTS ........................................ 15

ADVANCED DISC OPERATIONS ............................. 16
        Sector by Sector Copying - Two Drives       (16)
        Reading and Writing to a Sector             (16)
        Using Streams and Channels                  (16)
        The Execute File                            (17)

USING A PRINTER ...................................... 18
        Compatible Printers                         (18)
        Setting up your Printer                     (18)
        Starting to Print -
          LPRINT, LLIST & SAVE SCREEN$ 1            (19)
        Snapshot Printing                           (20)
        Changing the Layout of your Printed Page    (20)
        Printing from a Commercial Word-Processor   (21)
        Other Types of Printer                      (22)

QUICK REFERENCE GUIDE ................................ 23

GUARANTEE REGISTRATION ............................... 24



Please don't forget to fill in your Guarantee Registration form
and return it to Miles Gordon Technology within 14 days of purchase.



SETTING UP

WARNING: Don't forget to turn  off the  power to  your Spectrum 
before  you connect or disconnect any peripherals, including the 
PLUS D.

With the power  off,  carefully  connect  your  PLUS  D  to  the 
computer and your disc drive and printer to the PLUS D.  If  you
are  using  other  peripherals,  connect them to the computer in
their normal places.  If you are using a peripheral which  plugs
into the Spectrum's edge connector,  you'll  need to use a  hard
"Y" connector or "mother board" (cable  connectors  do  not work
with the PLUS D) so that it can be  attached at the same time as
the PLUS D.

For the first steps, you'll  need to have your cassette recorder 
connected to the computer in the normal way.

Turn  the Spectrum power on and the normal Spectrum introductory 
screen  will appear on your monitor/TV.  The red indicator light 
on  your PLUS  D will  come on,  indicating that  the electrical 
connection  between  the  PLUS  D  and  the  Spectrum  has  been 
correctly  made.  Turn on the power to the disc drive and insert
a blank disc.


CREATING YOUR SYSTEM DISC

You'll  have noticed that a cassette  has been supplied with the
PLUS D.  The program on the System Cassette asks you a series of
questions about your  system - what  sort of disc  drive are you
using? are you using a printer?  etc.   You  need  to  load  the
program from cassette in the normal way.



Make sure  you have  a blank  disc in  your drive.   Don't worry
about  formatting the disc - that comes later.  (And don't worry
if you  don't understand  what formatting  is, either;  all will
soon be clear!)  Make sure that the drive is turned on.

When the tape has loaded simply  follow the instructions given on
the screen.  Don't worry if you make  a mistake  while  answering
the  questions.   You'll  be  given  the  opportunity  to  repeat
everything at the end.

By answering the questions, you create your own "SYSTEM FILE". At 
the end the program will allow you to FORMAT your first disc then 
save the SYSTEM FILE and a copy of the program. Once this has been 
done, you have created your "SYSTEM DISC", and if you follow our 
instructions carefully, you'll probably never need the System 
Cassette again. (But we recommend that you keep the cassette 
stored in a safe place, just in case!) Why not store it in the 
PLUS D's original carton, which you should keep just in case you 
ever need to send the unit back for repair?

NOTE: The light on your disc drive will stay on after it has been 
used for the first time. Don't worry, this is done to show you 
which was the last drive in use.


Problems with SYSTEM FILE questions?

1. I keep getting an error message "Nonsense in Basic" at the end
of the section on disc parameters. What's going wrong?
The problem is probably that a clean connection is not being made
between the PLUS D and the computer. Try cleaning the computer's
edge connector (a hard rubber, used gently, is the best way to
clean it). It this doesn't work, try to borrow a friend's computer
and see whether the PLUS D will work with it. If this is successful
it's likely that you have a faulty line on your computer (which may
not necessarily have been apparent with other interfaces). But if
it still doesn't work, then you probably have a faulty PLUS D -
return it for testing and repair.

2. I don't know the stepping rate of my disc drive.
Our 3.5" disc drives work best with the PLUS D at the default setting
of 8 milliseconds. Most other drives work best at 12 milliseconds.
If your drive seems to be behaving erratically (i.e. frequent Sector
Errors) then try using a slower stepping rate. Some 3" drives have a
stepping rate of 30 milliseconds. Remember we are talking about
milliseconds, so even at the maximum setting of 255 you will only
just notice the difference.

3. I don't understand the control codes in my printer manual.
Yes, printer manuals are notoriously difficult. Don't be afraid to 
experiment; you can't do any damage to your printer by sending wrong 
control codes. But if you are stuck, contact INDUG - the users'
group. Full contact details are in the Introductory issue of FORMAT.

4. I get an error message "Disc write PROTECTED" when the program
attempts to format the disc.
3.5" discs have a "Write Protect Window" in one corner; make sure
that is closed. 5.25" discs have a notch in one edge; make sure
this is UNCOVERED.



USING A DISC DRIVE

COMPATIBLE DISC DRIVES

The PLUS D will work with any drive which has the industry 
standard Shugart 400 connection interface (ask your dealer for a 
"Shugart 400-type") and is capable of double density operation. 
This means most drives which work with  the BBC range of computers 
(but not single density drives, and if you're buying a drive, make 
sure that it has its own power supply). You can use one or two 
drives; to get maximum efficiency from the PLUS D, we recommend 
3.5" or 5.25" 80-track double sided and double density drives, 
which will give you up to 780K of storage per drive. But Shugart 
400-type 3" drives will also work. Make sure you also buy good 
quality discs which have the same specifications as your drive.

If you want to use two drives, you can buy them in a single "dual" 
case with a single power supply and connector. Or you can use two 
single drives in tandem, attaching them to the PLUS D via a double 
drive connector. One drive however will need to have its internal 
setting changed so it answers to drive 2 commands.



LOADING THE DISC OPERATING SYSTEM

Connect the computer, the PLUS D and the disc drive(s) and turn on 
the power. The normal Spectrum title screen will appear, and the 
indicator lights on the PLUS D and on disc drive 1 will come on.

Insert your System Disc in disc drive 1. Type RUN, then ENTER. The 
disc drive will go into action for about two seconds and while 
this is happening, the PLUS D indicator light will temporarily go 
out (- the light always goes out while the PLUS D is actually 
executing a command).

When the System is loaded, the screen will display;

    Miles Gordon Technology G+DOS2a

and an OK message:

    O.K. G+DOS, 0:1

(G+DOS stands  for the Gordon Disc Operating System for the PLUS 
D. The 2a which follows shows the version number of the DOS, and 
this may change from time to time.)

This whole operation is technically known as "BOOTing" your 
system. You will need to do it each time your power up your 
system. Until the disc operating system is loaded in this way, the 
PLUS D acts only as a printer interface and will not accept disc 
commands.



THE CATALOGUE

Type CAT 1 (or CAT 2 if you wish to access drive 2) - ENTER.

In about two seconds the screen will display:
    - The heading PLUS D Disc 1 (or 2) Catalogue.
    - A list of the files on the disc with various comments.
      (The maximum number of files per disc is 80.)
    - The amount of free space on the disc in kilobytes.

A typical catalogue screen looks like this:

   * MGT PLUS D  DISC 1 CATALOGUE *
    1 +SYSTEM     14 CDE  8192,6656
    2 CONFIG      31 BAS  9100
    3 CONFIG1_C    4 CDE  40300,1750
    4 CONFIG2_C   14 CDE  42240,6656
    5 CONFIG3_C    1 CDE  49000,60
    6 snap F      97 SNP 48K
    7 screen      14 SCREEN$
    8 listing     34 M/DRIVE
    9 data         8 SPECIAL
   10 numeric      4 D.ARRAY
   11 character    5 $.ARRAY

    Number of free K-bytes  =  667

Most  of  the  information   on   this   catalogue   screen   is
automatically  displayed by  the PLUS  D.  The  only information
which you have to supply is the file-name, which is shown in the
second column.   These file-names  can be  up to  ten characters
long, in upper case or lower case characters, or a mixture.

The first column on the left shows the program number.  Whenever
you  save a file,  the PLUS D  will give it  the first available
program  number.  So,  if you  have the  catalogue shown  in the
example  above, the next file you save will automatically become
program number 12.  This program number will stay the same until
the file is erased (we do not list files in alphabetical order).
But if you erase, say, program number 8, then the next file you
save  to the disc will become the  new program number 8.

The third  column shows the  number of disc  sectors used.  Each
sector holds  512 bytes  (= 1/2  kilobyte), so  to find  out the
number of kilobytes used for each file, divide the number in the
third column by 2.

The fourth column is the file type, which the PLUS D automatically 
selects. The different types are shown in the table at the top of 
page 7. You probably won't fully understand the significance of 
these different types of file yet, but most of them are covered in 
this Manual. Those marked  with an asterisk are likely to be used 
by more experienced programmers and demand fuller explanation than 
we can give here. FORMAT - the User Group magazine published by 
INDUG - explores them in detail in regular articles.


    BAS                 =   Basic Program
    CDE                 =   Code File
    SNP 48K             =   48K Snapshot File
    SNP128K             =   128K Snapshot File
    SCREEN$             =   Screen File
    M/DRIVE             =   Microdrive Type File                *
    SPECIAL             =   Special File                        *
    D.ARRAY             =   Numeric Data Array
    $.ARRAY             =   Character Array
    OPENTYPE            =   File created by OPEN # statement    *
    EXECUTE             =   Execute File                        *

PLUS D File-Types

The  right-hand column of  the catalogue shows either the start 
address and length of  a CODE file (the same as when you save it), 
or for a Basic Program file, the line at which the program auto-
runs on loading.

The amount of free space  left  on  the  disc  is  displayed  in
kilobytes at the end of the catalogue.

If  your catalogue is longer than the screen you will be prompted 
with the "Scroll?" message in the normal way.

You  can also display an abbreviated  catalogue by typing CAT 1!
(or CAT 2!).  This would show the same catalogue in this format:

    +SYSTEM     CONFIG      CONFIG1_C   CONFIG2_C
    CONFIG3_C   snap F      screen      listing
    data        numeric     character

Both the full  and the  abbreviated catalogue  can be  listed on
screen simultaneously.   Or you could, for  example, list disc 1
in  full and disc 2  in the abbreviated form  (but you must list
the  full catalogue first, as CAT 1 clears the screen, while CAT
1! does not)

If  you wish to print out the catalogue on your printer, you can
use the special CAT  #3  command.   For  example,  to  send  the
catalogue on drive 1 to the printer, you enter:
    CAT #3;1
To print an abbreviated catalogue from drive 2, you enter:
    CAT #3;2!

Question

What are the files that are  already on my disc - +SYSTEM,
CONFIG, CONFIG1_C, CONFIG2_C, and CONFIG3_C?

+SYSTEM is the system file that you created earlier.  The
other four  files allow you  to re-load the  set-up program from
disc  if you wish to change your system file later.  If you ever
need to do this, simply load in the CONFIG program.



PLUS D DISC DRIVE COMMANDS

When  you use the PLUS D and  a disc drive, Basic commands typed
on the  computer keyboard are followed by  a Disc Specifier - a
code to let the computer know that the instructions are directed
toward the disc drive, and not, for example, to a tape recorder.

For ease of explanation in this Manual, the Disc Specifier will
always be referred to as D1, meaning that the instruction is for
drive  number 1.  However, when you are working on the computer,
the following options are also available:

    D1 or dl  =  a command for drive 1
    D2 or d2  =  a command for drive 2
    D* or d*  =  a command for the last drive in use

(Programmers  should note  that D*  is particularly  useful when
your disc file  autoruns and calls  up another file  on the same
drive.   Also note  that a  variable can  be assigned  for drive
number 1 or 2 but not for *.)

By typing an upper case 'D' rather than a lower case 'd' when 
saving a file, the abbreviated disc catalogue will be displayed 
automatically when the save is complete.  A new catalogue also 
appears automatically if you type an upper case 'D' when erasing 
or renaming a file.

Alternatively,  the   PLUS  D  also   understands  the  Sinclair
Microdrive syntax.  For example, you can load a file by entering
        LOAD *"m";1;"file-name"
The PLUS D  syntax will  obviously be  preferred by  most users,
since it is  much easier  than Microdrive  syntax.  In  fact, we
only  mention that the  PLUS D understands  Microdrive syntax in
order to make the point  that  most  programs  written  for  the
Microdrive will  be able to  run without alteration  on the PLUS
D's disc system.   One  small  change  may  be  required:  if  a
Microdrive program  uses a CLOSE  #n statement, you  will have to
modify this  to CLOSE #*n.  We  are obliged to use  the * to fail
syntax in order to correct a small bug in the Spectrum's ROM.

SAVING A FILE AND VERIFYING

First,  ENTER this  short program  called "Squares".   We'll use
this program to show the PLUS D's various disc operations:

    10 REM Squares
    20 FOR n=1 TO 10
    30 PRINT n,n*n
    40 NEXT n

Then, to save the program on the disc in drive 1, ENTER:
    SAVE D1 "Squares"

The  screen border will flash (provided  that you said it should
when you were  setting up your  System File), and  after about 2
seconds the program will be saved.
The file names you choose can be any combination of letters and 
numbers - or even spaces - but the maximum number of characters is 
ten. You can use upper case or lower case characters, or a mixture 
of both. In the catalogue, the file names will appear exactly as 
you originally typed them, but when you re-load a file it doesn't 
matter if letters originally typed in lower case are changed to 
upper case, or vice versa; i.e. "ThIs FiLe" is the same as "THIS 
file".

Warning: Don't use the characters ? or * in your file names, as 
this may cause problems with other commands we deal with later.

As described in the last section, if you have saved using a 
capital 'D', the abbreviated disc catalogue is automatically 
displayed.  You'll see the program Squares shown on the catalogue 
as the last entry.  But if you wish, you can do a further check to 
ensure that the program has been correctly saved, by entering:
    VERIFY D1 "Squares"
When the O.K. message confirms the save, clear Squares from the 
computer's memory by entering NEW.


LOADING A PROGRAM

Now you can reload Squares from the disc, by entering:
    LOAD D1 "Squares"

When the O.K. message appears, the program has been loaded, But so 
far we haven't given an instruction to make the program run. Let's 
do that now by entering:
    SAVE D1 "Squares" LINE 10

But of course, there's already a program called Squares saved on 
the disc. The PLUS D tells you this and asks you whether you wish 
to overwrite the existing file by entering Y (= Yes) or N (= No). 
Enter Y. Then:
    LOAD D1 "Squares"

BREAKING INTO A PROGRAM

To break into the program and stop Squares running, use the normal 
Spectrum BREAK key.

Note that BREAK will stop the computer running most normal 
routines, but it will have no effect during a disc read/write 
(i.e. Load or Save) operation until the disc activity has been 
completed.

RENAMING A FILE

To rename a file, we use the two keywords ERASE and TO. For 
example, let's rename the Squares file as Example 1:
    ERASE D1 "Squares" TO "Example 1"
The abbreviated catalogue will confirm that the change has been 
made.


COPYING A FILE

To copy a file, use the two keywords SAVE and TO. Copy the program 
you have written by entering:
    SAVE D1 "Example 1" TO  D1 "Newcopy"
Once the file has loaded into memory, you are prompted to "Insert 
TARGET disc - Press SPACE". If you want the copy file on the same 
disc just press space; try that now. When the file has been copied 
you are told "Insert SOURCE disc - Press SPACE"; this is so the 
PLUS D can check to see if there are any other files to be copied 
(see WILD-CARDS page 14). When copying is complete, the Spectrum 
automatically receives a NEW command and your screen will be 
cleared. Check that your copy has been made, and find out how the 
full catalogue looks, by entering CAT 1. If you've followed the 
suggestions here, your catalogue should include a file called 
Example 1 and another called Newcopy. Note the amount of free 
space left on your disc.

Perhaps you wish to back up the file on a different disc but with 
the same file-name.  (ALWAYS do this with your important files.) 
In this case, using your original disc, you enter:
    SAVE D1 "Example 1" TO D1
Once again you will be prompted to insert the TARGET disc - and of 
course you'll do so this time as you're making a back-up on 
another disc. If the file already exists on the TARGET disc you 
will be asked whether you wish to overwrite it; press Y for Yes or 
N to cancel the copy. Remember - the SOURCE disc is the disc with 
the file you want to copy on it - the TARGET disc is the one you 
want the file copied to.

If you are using two disc drives with the PLUS D, you can also 
copy a file from one drive to the other, using the command:
    SAVE D1 "File-name" TO D2
If you add a file-name after D2, the new copy will have this as 
its new file-name: otherwise, the new copy will have the same name 
as the original.

The SAVE...TO command will NOT copy three types of file which we 
come to later - Snapshot files, files created by the OPEN # 
statement and Microdrive Type files (created by some machine code 
programs written for microdrives).

ERASING A FILE

Let's now erase the file called Example 1, by entering:
    ERASE D1 "Example 1"
After the erase, your abbreviated catalogue will confirm that 
Example 1 is no longer there. Enter CAT 1 for the full listing, 
and you'll see that more space has been made free on the disc 
(although this is such a small program that any change will be 
minimal!)

NOTE: Unlike Interface 1, the PLUS D returns an error message if
you try to erase a non-existent file.  When using programs
originally written for Microdrive, you may sometimes need to
delete ERASE commands in the listing to avoid the error message
when the program is running.


CREATING AN AUTOLOAD FILE

An autoload file is one which loads as soon as you "BOOT" the 
operating system (see page 5). You are allowed one autoload file 
per disc. For an illustration of an autoload file, let's rename 
the file Newcopy. Enter:

    ERASE D1 "Newcopy" TO "Autoload"

When the catalogue confirms that the change has been made, turn 
off the power to your Spectrum so that you lose everything in the 
computer's memory.  (Turn off the power - don't use the Spectrum's 
reset button - we're coming to this in the next section.)

Turn on the power again and load the operating system from your 
system disc by entering RUN then pressing ENTER. Your Autoload 
program (which, you'll remember, is the original Squares program) 
will be loaded as soon as G+DOS has been BOOTed, then instead of 
the normal PLUS D title screen, you'll see the Squares program 
running. Any Basic program can be renamed as AUTOLOAD.


THE SPECTRUM'S RESET BUTTON

All  Spectrums from the ZX Spectrum+ model onwards have a reset
button  which allows you to reset  your system without having to
turn off the mains power.

When  you have  the PLUS  D attached,  and press  the computer's
reset  button, everything stored  in the Spectrum's  RAM will be
lost as usual, but the PLUS D still retains the operating system
in its own memory - unless the DOS has been corrupted or changed
in some  way, and  this is  automatically detected.   This means
that you don't need to reload  the  PLUS  D's  system  from  the
system disc - you just carry on giving normal PLUS D commands.

Of  course, if power  to the computer  is turned off,  or if the
system  has been corrupted, the PLUS  D's operating system is no
longer retained  in memory.  To be able  to use PLUS D commands,
you'll  then have to load the  operating system from your system
disc afresh.


Problems?

Every time I enter a PLUS D command, nothing happens except
a question  mark that appears in the  command line on the screen
when I press ENTER.

You haven't  loaded the  operating  system  -  the  Spectrum
and PLUS D doesn't  recognise a disc command until  the G+DOS has
been booted up.  Did you forget to load the system in?  Have you
tried using a different system disc in case the one you're using
now has been corrupted?


SNAPSHOT FILES

For many  PLUS D users, one of  the most important features will
be  the interface's ability  to transfer virtually  any piece of
Spectrum  software to disc easily and  instantly by means of the
Snapshot Button.  You can take Snapshot saves at any time during
a  program and as often as you  like; if you are a games-player,
you'll find it especially valuable to be able to:

- start a game at an advanced level instead of at the beginning;
- come  back to a game on another occasion and start at exactly
the point where you had to leave it last time;
- keep a permanent record of your high scores.

A Snapshot save  is made when  you press the  Snapshot Button on
the   PLUS  D  once.   Anything  and  everything   held  in  the
Spectrum's memory at that  time is  saved to  the last  drive in
use, shown by the indicator light on the disc drive.

But there are  three  different  types  of  Snapshot  file.   To
experiment, first make sure that your system has been booted up.
Then load  in any program (a game  is best for demonstration) in
the normal way - from disc or from cassette.  (If you're loading
from  cassette, you should  of course use  the Spectrum's normal
LOAD "" command, and not the special PLUS D disc syntax.)

When the program has  loaded  and  started  to  run,  press  the
Snapshot  Button. You'll notice that your program will be frozen
at  its   current  status,  and   you  will  see   a  number  of
multi-coloured lines filling the borders on the screen.  You now
have three Snapshot save options:

Press key 3 on the Spectrum to save only the current SCREEN. A 
screen save will occupy 7K of space on a disc (as a SCREEN$ file). 
When the save is complete, you'll see that the program will 
continue at the same point from which you left it.

Press key  4 on the  Spectrum for a  48K PROGRAM to  be saved to
disc.  Every time  you save a  48K program, 48K  of memory space
(or actually 97 sectors)  will be  used on  the disc.   When the
save is complete, in just  over  3  seconds,  the  program  will
continue  from the point at which you  left it.  If you want to,
you can take more Snapshots at later points in the program until
your disc is full - that's up to 16 Snapshots per disc on a 780K
capacity drive.

Press key 5 on the Spectrum for a 128K PROGRAM to be saved to 
disc. Every time you save a 128K program, 128K of space will be 
used on the disc (= 256 sectors).  The procedure here is slightly 
different.  The save will commence (and if you have kept flashing 
borders in your system file, you'll see the borders flashing), but 
then the program will appear to be frozen again. If the picture on 
your screen (the picture - not the border) has changed, press key 
'Y' (= Yes): if it has not, press key 'N'.  The 128K save will 
then be complete in about 10 seconds and the program will resume 
from the point at which you left it.
If you have loaded the program on drive 1, but wish to save your
snapshot  file to drive 2 - or vice versa - press the CAPS SHIFT
key on the Spectrum at the same time as pressing key 3, 4, or 5.

If  you hit the Snapshot Button accidentally, and wish to return
immediately to your program, press key X on the Spectrum.

When you've saved a Snapshot  file,  press  the  computer  reset
button  once (or in the case of Spectrums without reset buttons,
turn  off the power, then  turn it back on  again and re-boot the
PLUS D system).  Then call up  the  catalogue  -  enter  CAT  1.
You'll see  that  your  Snapshot  file  has  been  automatically
labelled "Snap A/B/C" etc.  with  the  letter  of  the  alphabet
dependent  upon the file's position  in the catalogue.  Clearly,
it  would be difficult to remember  the precise contents of your
snapshot file  if this were  the only name  possible.  So you'll
need to give  your  Snapshot  file  an  identifiable  file-name.
First choose a  new name for  the file you  have snapshotted and
then rename it using the ERASE...TO keywords.

Then, to reload Snapshot files, you enter:
    LOAD D1 "Your file" S     (for a 48K file)
    LOAD D1 "Your file" K     (for a 128K file)
    LOAD D1 "Your file" SCREEN$  (for a screen file)
Without the  S, K  or SCREEN$  identifiers, the  Snapshot files
will not load - unless you use the special abbreviated syntax.

ABBREVIATED SYNTAX

Now that you've  learnt the  basic disc  drive commands,  we can
introduce  you to a much easier way  of loading a file,  you can
just enter:
    LOAD P6
This has the effect of loading the file labelled number 6 in the
catalogue.   If you  use this  command you  don't need  to worry
about the  S, K or  SCREEN$ identifiers to  load snapshot files.
It  also makes it much easier to load code files.  Normally, you
would have to type, for example:
    LOAD D1 "CONFIG1_C"  CODE  40300,1750
-   stating the start address of the file and the number of bytes
used.  Instead, you can now simply enter LOAD P3.   Try it.

MERGE and VERIFY   can also be  used with the  program number in
this way - but ERASE cannot.

Problems?

1.  I've found lots of programs I can't snapshot.
We can't guarantee 100% success with snapshotting, but we're
pretty  close.  If you're  getting failure with  most of your
programs, there's probably  a problem  with your  equipment.
Hints on difficult programs are often published in FORMAT.

2.  I can't copy my Snapshot files using SAVE...TO.
Quite right - this is a security precaution against illegal
professional copying of commercial software.


WILD-CARDS

Wild-cards in a file name allow you to CATalogue, copy (using 
SAVE...TO) or ERASE a group of similar files in a single 
operation. Let us imagine, for example, that you have a series of 
files called:
    numbers1, numbers2, numbers3, numbers4

To erase all of them you can enter:
    ERASE  D1 "n*"
The effect of the star(*) is to say that all the rest of the file-
name doesn't matter: you wish to erase all files commencing with 
"n".  Be careful: this really means all files beginning with "n".

You could also enter:
    ERASE  D1 "??mb*"
You would then  erase all the  files which have  "-mb-" as their
third and  fourth letters.  The effect  of each question-mark is
to say that "this letter is of no significance".

The same syntax - using ? and * - is available for the SAVE...TO
and  CATalogue commands.   Thus if  you wanted  to copy  all the
files on disc 1 to disc 2, you could enter:
    SAVE D1 "*" TO D2
Or  if you wanted  to copy your  "numbers" files to  drive 2 and
also give them a new file-name, you could enter:
    SAVE D1 "numbers*" TO D2 "figures*"
Note that if  you are using  wild-cards, the new  file name must
have  the same number of characters as  the first - in this case
eight.

FORMATTING NEW DISCS

Before a floppy  disc is  used for  the first  time, it  must be
formatted.  You can also  format  a  previously used  disc;  the
effect  will be to wipe the disc clean of information.  You must
therefore be careful  not to  format a  disc which  contains any
files you may wish to keep (and let's say it again - ALWAYS make
back-up discs of important files!).  It is also risky to format
a disc while you are holding a program in the Spectrum's memory,
in case the program is overwritten with format information.

Your original system disc was formatted automatically at the end
of the set-up program.  But to format other discs. make sure the
PLUS D system is booted, and then enter:
    FORMAT D1

Always make  sure that you  have spare formatted  discs when you
start  work.  Then, if you fill  your original working disc, you
can  easily substitute  a spare  disc without  interrupting your
work in progress.  After formatting a new disc, it's also a good
idea  to copy the PLUS D system file onto it, so that you always
have  a spare system disc available.  You can copy the system to
a new disc by entering:
    SAVE  D1 "+SYSTEM"  CODE  8192,6656


ERROR REPORTS

There are  a number  of standard  Spectrum error  messages which
will appear on screen if the command you have typed in cannot be
obeyed.  For full  details, consult  the Spectrum  manual.  When
you are using  the PLUS  D, these  standard error  messages will
continue  to appear, but there are some additional error reports
which  refer specifically to disc  handling problems.  These are
some of the more important you may meet.

NONSENSE IN BASIC. This is a standard Spectrum error report, and 
if it appears as soon as you start trying to use the PLUS D, it 
suggests that the connection between the computer and the PLUS D 
is not being properly made, so the special PLUS D commands cannot 
be recognised, or it may mean that you have typed a command 
incorrectly - try again.

Nonsense in G+DOS. The PLUS D can't understand the command; check 
the syntax and try again.

FORMAT Data Lost. This means that the disc has been damaged or the 
file has been corrupted - perhaps you've been working too close to 
a magnetic field.  You won't be able to access the current file, 
and other files may also have been lost. Copy any remaining files 
to another disc immediately. Try reformatting the original disc, 
and if there's no permanent damage, you may be able to use it 
again, but don't risk storing important files on this disc.

SECTOR Error. This means that the information you've tried to save 
has been corrupted.  You'll need to rewrite the file and save it 
again. But your disc has not been damaged and need not be 
reformatted. The numbers after the error message tell you which 
track and which sector have been corrupted. You should always make 
a back-up copy of key files. If the Sector Error or Format Data 
Lost messages appear regularly, you may have a problem with your 
disc drive. The head may be dirty, or the drive may not be 
centring the discs correctly on insertion. Try cleaning the heads. 
If this fails, repairs may be necessary.

Disc Write PROTECTED. You cannot save, erase, or modify files on 
this disc until you uncover the security lock on the disc.  (Use 
the security lock on the disc to keep important files safe.)

File NOT FOUND. You are trying to load, copy, verify, erase or 
rename a file which is not present on the disc. Check that you 
have typed in the file name correctly. Make sure that you have 
used the file identifier - S, K or SCREEN$ - if necessary.

Not enough SPACE on disc. The file you are trying to save is too 
large for the space remaining on the disc. Insert another disc 
(one with more room) and then try again.

Directory FULL. The PLUS D's directory can hold a maximum of 80 
files. Either ERASE some files to create space or insert another 
disc.


ADVANCED DISC OPERATIONS

SECTOR BY SECTOR COPYING - TWO DRIVES

The command: FORMAT D1 TO 2 - formats the disc in drive 1 (and 
thus wipes it clean of data) and copies the contents of the disc 
in drive 2 to the disc in drive 1, sector by sector. BE VERY 
CAREFUL NOT TO FORMAT THE WRONG DISC. Because the copying is done 
a sector at a time, the copying process takes much longer than the 
SAVE...TO command; but the FORMAT...TO command will give you a 
disc which is identical in every respect to the one which has been 
copied. This command should only be used on a TWO DRIVE system.

READING AND WRITING TO A SECTOR

    LOAD @D,T,S,Address
    SAVE @D,T,S,Address

These commands are  used  for  reading  (or  writing)  a
specified sector on the disc, where:

    D = the drive number (type either 1 or 2 - not the D)
    T = the track number from 0 to 39 (40 track)
            or           from 0 to 79 (80 track)
        To read the second side on  a double-sided disc drive
            then            128 to 167 (40 track)
            or              128 to 207 (80 track)
    S = the sector number - from 1 to 10
    Address = the start of a 512 byte area in memory.
        This is where the contents of the sector are stored.

Working with a monitor program, this powerful command allows you 
to access a single sector on the disc from Basic. Particularly 
useful for breaking into, examining and modifying a Snapshot file.

USING STREAMS AND CHANNELS

i)     OPEN #S;D1 "filename"  IN  or  OUT

This command  is used to  open a file  on the disc  and attach a
stream  number to it, so that you can print out to or input from
that stream, where:

        S = Stream number - from 4 to 16 (type the number only)
        D = D1 or D2 (drive number - type D as well as drive no.)
 IN = When you specifically need an input or read file opened
OUT = When you specifically need an output or write file opened

If  you choose not to specify IN or OUT, then the default is the
same  as Interface 1: an input file if the file-name is found in
the catalogue, and an output file if the file-name is not found.
Also available is Microdrive syntax:
    OPEN #S;"m";1;"filename"


ii)  CLOSE #*S

This  command closes the file and stream opened in  the previous
command.  S  = Stream  number. If  you  do  not type  the stream
number,  then all current open streams will be closed.  Note the
addition of the * to Microdrive syntax.

iii) MOVE is  a command  which moves  a file,  one sector  at a
time, to either another file or a stream.

     MOVE D1 "filename" TO #S
This  command reads  the file  and outputs  it to  the specified
stream  (S = the stream number, from 4 to 16).

     MOVE D1 "filename-1" TO D1 "filename-2"
In this case MOVE copies the first fie to the second file.

iv)  CLEAR #
This  command clears all open streams  and channels, but it does
not CLOSE an output file.

v)   CLS #
This  command clears the  screen and attribute  area, and resets
BORDER, PAPER, INVERSE, BRIGHT, OVER and FLASH to the normal 
Spectrum start-up values.

THE EXECUTE FILE

An execute file is a machine code file occupying up to one sector 
length of memory (510 bytes). When loaded from disc it is executed 
(RANDOMIZE USR) in the PLUS D RAM, and not in the Spectrum memory 
as other files are.  An execute file gives the programmer the 
ability to execute utility routines - such as renumbering a 
program - without affecting or using the Spectrum memory.

To save a sector length of memory as an execute file, enter
    SAVE  D1 "filename"X,Address
where:
    X  = the execute file identifier - just type X
    Address = the location in the Spectrum of the
    machine-code program, which has been assembled
    to run at 15318 (3BD6 hex).

To  load the execute file  and run it internally  in the PLUS D,
enter:
    LOAD D1 "filename" X
or  LOAD Pn   -   in other words, the normal abbreviated
    syntax for LOAD.
After execution, control is returned to the Spectrum.

Examples  of the use of these more advanced features of the PLUS
D can regularly be  found  in  FORMAT,  often  in  programs  and
routines contributed by PLUS D and Disciple users.


USING A PRINTER

COMPATIBLE PRINTERS

The PLUS D  has  a  printer  interface  designed  to  work  with
standard centronics/parallel  type  printers.   You'll  need  to
provide the printer cable, which  may  differ  from  printer  to
printer.  Make sure that at the PLUS D end, the connector is the
standard BBC-type (that it has a 26-way connector).

The  PLUS D has been set up to work automatically with Epson FX80 
compatible  printers.  If  your  printer  is  not Epson FX80 
compatible, you'll need to make a few changes to your System File 
to make it work (see next section).

The  PLUS D offers sophisticated graphics printing capabilities.
Obviously, daisy  wheel printers,  which cannot  print graphics,
will  not be able to  make full use of  the PLUS D's facilities.
There are also  a small  number of  older dot-matrix  printers -
those which print  their characters  on a  7-dot rather  than an
8-dot matrix - which will not print graphics with the PLUS D.


SETTING UP YOUR PRINTER

If  you are using a disc drive and have already set up your PLUS
D System File (see page 4), then your printer will automatically
be ready for action every time you boot up the system.

If you don't yet have a disc drive but wish to use the PLUS D as a 
stand-alone printer interface, you may do so. If your printer is 
Epson FX80 compatible, you should be able to plug the printer into 
the PLUS D, switch the system on and then type in POKE @ 11,0 (@ 
is symbol/shift 2) to turn the centronics interface on.

If your printer is not FX80 compatible then you may need to use 
the program on the System Cassette. Connect the printer to the 
PLUS D and turn it on and load the System Cassette program in the 
normal way (LOAD "").

When the program has loaded, you'll be asked a series of 
questions.  The first questions relate to use of a disc drive. 
Press ENTER to bypass each of these questions and then press Y (= 
Yes) when asked "Do you want to use the PLUS D's printer port?"

At this point, you'll find the answers to the questions in your 
printer manual. If you find that the printer manual defeats you, 
please contact INDUG, the Users' Group, for help, as they have a 
wide experience of different types of printer.

Finally, there'll be a series of questions referring to the disc 
drive  again.  Answer No  to all these  questions.  Printing can 
now commence. Remember that you will need to re-run the program if 
you switch off the computer.


STARTING TO PRINT - LPRINT, LLIST and SAVE SCREEN$ 1

LPRINT  and LLIST  have exactly  the same  meaning as  PRINT and
LIST,  except that instead  of making information  appear on the
screen, they send it  to your  printer.  To  see how  they work,
enter the following program - but first, check that your printer
is attached  to the PLUS D and turned  on, and that you have set
up your printer as described in the previous paragraph:

    10 LPRINT "This program"
    20 LPRINT "prints out the character set"
    30 FOR n=32 TO 255
    40 LPRINT CHR$ n;
    50 NEXT  n
    60 LPRINT

When you run the program, the LPRINT command sends the heading and 
the list of characters directly to the printer.

Now enter LLIST - and the listing of your program is sent to the 
printer.

Then enter LIST to restore the program listing to the screen. 
Finally, enter SAVE SCREEN$ 1. (Note that if you are using 48K 
mode on your computer, both SAVE and SCREEN$ must be typed in 
using the Spectrum keywords.) With this command, the contents of 
your screen are copied (technically, "dumped") to the printer.

SAVE SCREEN$ 1 is a particularly powerful command: if you've set 
up your system to print graphics, you can dump screen pictures to 
your printer. There's also a SAVE SCREEN$ 2 command, which will 
dump a screen picture to the printer in a much larger format: with 
this command, you'll find that the print-out will be sideways down 
the page, and that the various colours on the screen will be 
interpreted as shades on the print-out. But, the SAVE SCREEN$ 2 
command will only work with Epson-type printers which recognise 
the ESC * code for bit image graphics. INDUG may be able to help 
if your printer is unable to do the larger screen-dump.

Note that you can also use SAVE SCREEN$ instead of SAVE SCREEN$ 1.

Note also a peculiarity of Spectrum Basic. If you have written a 
program listing on screen, you cannot dump the screen directly to 
your printer. First you have to enter LIST: then you can use SAVE 
SCREEN$ 1. Or, faster would be to write your program, then simply 
enter LLIST.

When printing, you can also use the commands TAB and AT to 
position your text at a certain point on the printed line or page. 
Try these two examples to see how the commands work:

    LPRINT TAB  8;"This line is indented"
    LPRINT AT 4,5;"This line is less indented"

In example 1, you start printing at character position 8 on the 
current line; in example 2, you start on line 4 at position 5.
SNAPSHOT PRINTING

The  SAVE SCREEN$ 1 command allows you to dump the screen to the
printer -  provided you are able to  enter a Basic command.  But
what  happens if, for example,  you are in the  middle of a game
and  you want to print the current  screen but you can't exit to
Basic? With the PLUS D  you can still do your screen dump, using
the Snapshot Button.   This  use  of  the  Snapshot  Button  has
nothing to  do with  the disc  drive -  and in  fact you  can do
Snapshot prints even  if  you  are  not  using  a  drive.   This
facility  offers exciting new possibilities to games players: in
an  adventure game, for example, you can print out the screen at
each new  location, gradually building up  a complete picture of
all the available screens.

To experiment with Snapshot printing, load a normal commercial 
program, preferably a game with good graphics to show the facility 
at its best. When you wish to print a screen, simply press the 
Snapshot button - in the same way as if you were taking a Snapshot 
save. As usual, the program is paused. If you then press key 1 on 
the Spectrum, you will send a 32-column screen dump to the 
printer. If instead you press key 2 on the Spectrum (and  you have 
an  Epson FX80 compatible printer that understands the ESC '*' 
code), you will be able to send a large-size screen dump to the 
printer - just as if you had entered the command SAVE SCREEN$ 2.

When printing is complete, the  program  will  resume  from  the
point at which you left it.

CHANGING THE LAYOUT OF YOUR PRINTED PAGE

With an Epson compatible printer, the PLUS D's printer interface
has been set up to the following standard:

    Line-length:    80 characters per line
    Line-spacing:   1/6" (=12/72" or 6 lines per inch)
    Line-feeds after carriage return:
    Number of left-hand margin spaces:  0
    £, #, and © symbols set to be printed:  Yes
    Density/size of graphics:  Single density graphics
    Character pitch:  Pica  (= 10 characters per inch)

If you wish to change these variables, you can use a special PLUS 
D command - the POKE @ command. Every POKE @ command must be 
followed by a number, which states which variable is to be 
changed.  For example, the POKE @5 statement is concerned with 
line length, while the POKE @7 statement is concerned with the 
spaces between lines. The number is followed by a comma and 
another number, which is the variable to be set. For example, POKE 
@5,40 sets your line length to 40 characters per line.

Note: UDGs, Spectrum block graphics and, if you said so, the 
£, # and © print as an 8x8 matrix of dots. On some printers this
is slightly wider than their normal characters and causes long
lines to overflow onto the next line.


The POKE  @ statements are  temporary settings, and  if you turn
off  your mains power, you'll need  to reset them.  However, the
PLUS D retains POKE @ commands if you simply reset the computer;
you'll be able to continue with the same variables in use.

This is how to change your page layout using the POKE  @ commands:

LINE LENGTH: POKE @5,n  (n = 0 to 255)  default 80

The number you type in for the variable (n) will be the number of 
characters per line - provided your printer can cope with the 
number you've typed. Note that printing UDGs can upset this 
feature as characters printed in "bit image" are wider than normal 
printer characters.

LINE SPACING: POKE @7,n  (n = 0 to 255)  default 12

The number you type in will set the spacing between lines in 
increments of n/72" - thus 12 is 12/72" or 1/6" (= 6 lines per 
inch).

LINE FEEDS: POKE @8,n  (n = 0 to 255)  default  0

The number you type will be the number of line-feeds after a 
Carriage Return. Most printers are set up to do an auto LF.

LEFT MARGIN: POKE @9,n  (n - 0 to 255)  default  0

Sets the number of spaces before printing begins on each line.

PRINTING £, # and © as graphics: POKE @10,n (n = 0 or 1) default 1

Type 1 to print these in Bit Image Mode, 0 to leave them alone.

PRINTING FROM A COMMERCIAL WORD PROCESSOR

Commonly,  commercially-produced   word  processors   and  other
"serious" software have  a special  printer driver  which allows
you to send your work  to  a  printer.   Much  serious  Spectrum
software has now been  modified  to  work  with  the  Disciple's
printer  interface.  The Disciple was  the PLUS D's predecessor,
and if your software allows you a Disciple printing option, this
will also work with the PLUS D.

Occasionally  though, you  may find  that a  Disciple or  PLUS D
printer  driver is not offered.   If so, and if  when you try to
print, you get  unsatisfactory  results  (a  common  symptom  is
question-marks appearing in  the  left-hand  margin),  you  will
usually  be able to solve the problem by finding the part of the
program listing which sends data to the printer and preceding it
with the  line: POKE @6,1.  Then, when  the printing finishes,
enter the line POKE @6,0.

What's happening here  is that, by  entering POKE @6,1 you are
allowing codes embedded in the  software  to  be  sent  directly
through  to the printer without being intercepted by the PLUS D.


POKE @6,0 allows the PLUS D to take over again when the software's 
printer driver is no longer in operation. (Programmers note that 
POKE @6,1 allows the printer driver to output directly to the 
printer the absolute value of the code 0 to 255. Note also that 
under normal circumstances, if a control character is to be sent 
to the printer using LPRINT, then you must precede it with CHR$ 27 
- even when you want to output CHR$ 27. Thus, to output CHR$ 27, 
CHR$ 65, CHR$ 40 you would enter:

    LPRINT CHR$ 27;CHR$ 27;CHR$ 27;CHR$ 65;CHR$ 27;CHR$ 40

But if you enter POKE @6,1 first to release PLUS D control, then 
you will not need to precede the control characters with CHR$ 27. 
When you've finished, don't forget to return to POKE @6,0.


OTHER TYPES OF PRINTER

If you are using a serial printer, you cannot connect it to the 
PLUS D, but you can continue to use the PLUS D as a disc 
interface.  Your serial printer can be connected directly into the 
RS232 port on the Spectrum 128 or +2 as usual; or if you have a 
separate RS232 interface, use a two-way "hard" connector so that 
it can be attached to the computer at the same time as the PLUS D. 
When the System Program asks whether you are using the PLUS D's 
centronics printer port, answer No.

If you said NO to the PLUS D's printer port when you ran the 
System Program, you can switch it on with another POKE @ 
statement. POKE @11,0 makes the PLUS D's centronics printer 
channel active. To turn it off again then POKE @11,1 but note you 
will have to reset the Spectrum's printer channel before you can 
use it.

The Sinclair ZX Printer and the Alphacom 32 printer are NOT 
compatible with the PLUS D. It is advisable not to try connecting 
them at the same time as the PLUS D.


Questions/Problems

1.  I can't find the initialisation code in my printer manual.
If  you can't  find this  code, try  the code  for Carriage
Return,  which is almost  universally 13 (in  decimal), or enter
128 so  that no codes are sent.   Remember that if you're having
real  difficulty in understanding  your printer manual, INDUG is
likely to have had previous experience with your printer.

2. Are there other POKE @ commands?
Yes.   If  you're  a  serious  programmer,  needing  fuller
coverage of these -  or details  of the  PLUS D's  command codes
(used in  machine  code  routines  to  effect  control  of  disc
subroutines),  please talk to the Users' Group.  There's regular
coverage in FORMAT.

3. My printer won't do screen dumps.
Screen dump routines for non-FX80 compatible printers may be
available from INDUG.


PLUS D QUICK REFERENCE GUIDE

RUN                           Boots the system
CAT 1                         Displays catalogue
CAT 1!                        Displays shortened catalogue
SAVE D1"filename"             Saves file
VERIFY D1"filename"           Confirms save has been made
LOAD D1"filename"             Loads file (except Snapshot files)
LOAD D1"filename" S           Loads 48K Snapshot file
LOAD D1"filename" K           Loads 128K Snapshot file
LOAD D1"filename"SCREEN$      Loads screen file
LOAD Pn                       Loads the program (from its number)
ERASE D1"file" TO "new file"  Renames a file
ERASE D1"filename"            Erases a file
SAVE D1"file" TO D2           Copies a file from drive1 to drive2
FORMAT D1                     Formats disc in drive 1
FORMAT D1 TO 2                Formats drive 1; copies from 2 to 1
OPEN #n;D1"filename"IN        Opens an input file on stream n
OPEN #n;D1"filename"OUT       Opens an output file on stream n
CLOSE #*n                     Closes file on  stream n
CLOSE #*                      Closes all open files
MOVE D1"filename" TO #n       Reads file; outputs to stream n
MOVE D1"fileA" TO D1 "fileB"  Reads file; writes it to 2nd file
CLEAR #                       Clears all open streams & channels
CLS #                         Clears screen & attributes area
SAVE D1"filename"X,Address    Saves 510 byte Execute file
LOAD D1"filename"X            Executes file in PLUS D RAM
LOAD @ D,T,S,Address          Reads a specified sector to memory
SAVE @ D,T,S,Address          Writes to specified sector to disc
LLIST line-no                 Sends program listing to printer
LPRINT variable-list          Prints to printer
SAVE SCREEN$ 1                Produce 32-column screen dump
SAVE SCREEN$ 2                Produce large-size screen dump
LPRINT TAB n;                 TAB to position n on current line
LPRINT AT n1,n2;              Set printer n1 lines down, TAB to n2

SAVE...TO, ERASE, CAT can be used with * and ? for wild-card 
operations

SNAPSHOT BUTTON - halt program temporarily & allow selection of:
1 - 32 column screen-dump;   2 - Large-size printer dump;
3 - Screen save;  4 - 48K Snapshot save;   5 - 128K Snapshot save;
Key X breaks out of Snapshot and returns to program


GUARANTEE

Thank you for buying the PLUS D. To ensure your satisfaction, the 
product is guaranteed by Miles Gordon Technology against defective 
design, workmanship or materials for a period of 6 months from the 
date of purchase, subject to the conditions below:

1. Please complete and return to us the Guarantee Registration 
   form at the bottom of this page, within 14 days of purchase.  
   Until we have your registration form, we cannot undertake 
   repairs under guarantee.
2. The guarantee only applies to the UK and to the original 
   purchaser.
3. The guarantee is invalidated if the product is opened, 
   modified, repaired, or otherwise tampered with by any party 
   other than Miles Gordon Technology or their appointed agents.
4. The guarantee is also invalidated if the PLUS D has been in 
   any way misused, used with unsuitable equipment, or subjected 
   to deliberate, accidental or consequential damage.
5. Claims under the guarantee should be referred to the dealer 
   from whom you purchased your PLUS D. If this is not possible, 
   contact us directly for authority to return.
6. Customers will be responsible for the cost of sending a unit 
   back to us for repair. Please pack the product carefully 
   (preferably in the original package) to prevent damage in 
   transit. If posting the unit, please obtain a postage receipt 
   and keep it safe until your PLUS D is returned. Make sure you 
   enclose your name and address, and if possible enclose a note 
   explaining what appears to be wrong.
7. Your unit should be returned to you in working order within 28 
   days. If it is not, please contact us on 0223-311665, and give 
   details of what was returned, when, and how.
8. The purchaser's sole and exclusive remedy under this guarantee 
   is for repair or replacement of the PLUS D. No other remedy, 
   including, but not limited to, incidental or consequential 
   damage or loss of whatsoever nature shall be available to the 
   purchaser.
9. This guarantee is in addition to and does not in any way 
   affect the purchaser's statutory rights.

=================================================================

               PLUS D GUARANTEE REGISTRATION

Please detach and return to Miles Gordon Technology, Lake Side 
Technology Park, Phoenix Way, Swansea SA7 9EH, within 14 days of 
purchase.

Name ................................  Purchase Date .............

Address ..........................................................

..................................................................
    
Product No (see underside of PLUS D) .............................
     
Dealer's Name/Town ...............................................

=================================================================

THE PLUS D ON THE +2A AND +3

For owners of +2A's (black case and uses +3 basic) and plus 3's users
of the +D there are one or two important things to bear in mind.

1) In 48K basic the +D acts as normal the tokenised keys for using the
+D are

        (Extended mode)(Symbol shift) 0    to get FORMAT
        (Extended mode)(Symbol shtft) 9    to get CAT
        (Extended mode)(Symbol shift) 7    to get ERASE
        (Extended mode)(Symbol shift} 4    to get OPEN #
        (Extended mode)(Symbol shift} 5    to get CLOSE #
        (Extended mode}(Symbol shift) r    to get VERIFY

2) When using the +D in +3 basic first boot your system disk using RUN
then type the following line

        POKE ©4426,16:POKE @4427,92 (enter)

The +D can now be used to freeze, catalog and run programs of 128K length.
Please note that there are one or two slight anomalies due to the fact that
+3 basic is expecting a 3 drive. Even if you reset the computer using the
reset button you will not need to enter these pokes again.

3) When using the +2a and +3 computers you will need a small Fixer Board,
which connects between the computer and the +D unit. This board is to take
care of certain changes Amstrad made to the expansion bus of these computers.